Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab.
This is a free, complete course for the CCNA.
If you like these videos, please subscribe
to follow along with the series.
Also, please like and leave a comment, and
share the video to help spread this free series
of videos.
Thanks for your help.
Also, remember to download this practice lab
from the link in the video description and try it
out yourself in packet tracer.
If you want more labs like these, I highly
recommend picking up Boson’s NetSim for
the CCNA, click the link in the video description
to check it out.
It’s a network simulator like packet tracer,
but it’s even better, and it includes all
of these guided labs to not only help you
get hands-on practice configuring and troubleshooting,
but also deepen your understanding of the
exam topics.
I used it myself when studying for my certifications,
so I feel confident about recommending it
to all of you.
Watch until the end of this video for a preview
of a lab from NetSim.
And if you want to get your own copy of NetSim,
please follow the link in the video description.
Okay, in the lab instructions for today’s lab,
I mention that you should turn off link lights
in packet tracer.
That’s because, if you can see the link
lights, you will know which interfaces are
in a forwarding state and which are in a blocking
state.
To turn them off, which I already have, click
on options up here, then preferences, then
make sure ‘show link lights’ is disabled.
By the way, I assume you’ve already studied
and understood the process I taught in the
lecture video, so this will just be a fairly
quick walkthrough.
If you have forgotten some concepts, like
bridge ID, root cost, etc, please watch the
lecture video again to review before trying
this exercise.
So, the first portion of this lab is the same
as the practice quiz questions we did at the
end of the lecture video.
Identify the root bridge, then identify the
spanning tree port role of each switch interface,
either root, designated, or non-designated.
But since we’re in Packet Tracer, we can
now use the CLI to confirm our answers.
I didn’t want to make the lecture video
too long so I didn’t show any CLI commands
so please watch this video to see which commands
you can use to confirm spanning tree.
First up, which switch is the root bridge?
First we must compare the bridge priorities,
and if there is a tie, compare the MAC addresses.
Those are the two components of the spanning
tree bridge ID, and the switch with the lowest
bridge ID becomes the root bridge.
In this case the answer is fairly obvious,
SW3 has the lowest priority, 24577, so it
will be the root bridge.
So, we now know port role of each interface on
SW3, all of its interfaces must be designated
ports because it is the root bridge.
Just to make things easier to remember, let
me make labels.
Click on the note button up here, and let
me make 4 Ds, for designated.
Okay, and after you have made them let’s move them into position.
Okay, so all four interfaces on SW3 are designated
ports.
Next up, let’s find the root ports.
Each other switch in the topology must have
a single root port.
The first criteria to determine the root port
is the root cost, the interface with the lowest
root cost will become the root port.
How about SW1?
Via either F0/1 or F0/2 it would have a cost
of 19, plus 4 for SW1’s G0/1, and plus 4 for
SW4’s G0/2, so 27.
Via f0/3 or f0/4 it has a cost of just 19.
So, it will be either F0/3 or F0/4, but we
don’t know which so let’s look at the
tiebreaker, neighbor bridge ID.
Well, both are connected to the same switch,
SW3, so that is a tie as well.
The final tie breaker is the neighbor switch’s
port ID, the lowest one wins.
It’s important to remember that this isn’t
the LOCAL switch’s port ID, it’s not SW1’s
port ID.
It’s the neighbor switch’s port ID, SW3’s
F0/1 is lower, so that means SW1’s F0/4
interface will be the root port, let me create
that label.  And then I will move it over to SW1.
Okay next, which will be SW2’s root port?
F0/3 is directly connected to the root bridge, so it might look obvious that this will be the root port, however
via F0/3 it has a root cost of 19.
Via G0/1 it has a root cost of 4, plus 4 for
SW4’s G0/2, so only 8.
Therefore, G0/1 will be the root port.
That also means we can label SW4’s G0/1
interface as designated, the interface connected
to a root port is always designated.
So, SW4’s root port is now obvious, since
G0/1 is designated, it’s other port, G0/2,
must be the root port.
It also has a very low cost, only 4.
Okay, so we have found and labeled all of
the root ports.
Next up, in each remaining collision domain
we must determine which side will be designated
and which will be non-designated.
First up, two very obvious ones.
SW1’s F0/3 is connected to the root bridge,
so it must be non-designated.
The same goes for SW2’s F0/3, it is connected
directly to SW3, so it is non-designated.  SW3's port is already designated.
All that remain are F0/1 and F0/2 on SW1 and
SW2.
The first criteria is the root cost.
The interfaces on the switch with the lower
root cost will be designated, the other side
will be non-designated.
SW1's root cost is 19, via F0/4.
However SW2’s root cost is 8 via G0/1.
So, SW2 has the lower root cost, therefore
its F0/1 and F0/2 interfaces will both be
designated.
The other side, SW1’s F0/1 and F0/2, will
both be non-designated, in a blocking state.
Now that we’ve figured out the answers,
let’s actually check by using the CLI.
Let’s go on the root bridge, SW3 first.
So enter privileged exec mode with ENABLE.
And the first command I want to show you is SHOW
SPANNING-TREE.
At the top here, it shows the VLAN number.
If there were multiple VLANs on these switches,
you would see all of this information listed
separately for each VLAN.
In fact you can filter the output of this
command to show a single VLAN like this, SHOW
SPANNING-TREE VLAN 1.
But we only have a single VLAN, so it doesn’t
matter here.
Under that, spanning tree enabled protocol
IEEE.
This means we are using the ‘classic’
spanning tree.
Actually, it’s Cisco’s PVST, but this
means it’s in ‘classic’ mode rather
than the newer rapid spanning tree, which
we will look at in a future video.
Then there are two big sections, Root ID,
which lists information about this spanning
tree’s root bridge, and bridge ID, which
lists information about this switch’s information.
In this case, SW3 IS the root bridge, so they
are the same, with a few differences in the
information they present.
Under Root ID it just lists the priority of
24577, but down here it shows that really
its the priority of 24576 plus the extended
system ID of 1, for VLAN 1.
In the root ID section it clearly states,
this bridge is the root.
Then there are some timers listed, I’ll
talk about these timers in the next lecture
video.
Finally, at the bottom, each interface participating
in spanning tree is listed, you can see the
role, status, cost, interface ID, and interface
type, and I won't talk about the interface type in this
course by the way, it's not necessary.
So, because this is the root bridge, we expect
all interfaces to be designated ports and
to be forwarding.
As you can see, they are, so we were correct.
Now, before moving to another switch, let
me briefly show another couple commands.
SHOW SPANNING-TREE DETAIL lists similar information
to SHOW SPANNING-TREE, but as you might expect,
with more details.
I won’t go through everything here, but
feel free to take a look if you want.
And one more command, SHOW SPANNING-TREE SUMMARY.
This lists each VLAN, and shows how many interfaces
are in each STP state.
I told you about Blocking and Forwarding already,
but these two here, listening and learning,
are transitional states which I will teach
you about in the next video.
The final column, STP active, just lists how
many interfaces are STP activated in total.
By default, every interface that is connected
to another device and enabled will have STP
running.
Next let’s take a look at SW1.
Enter privileged exec mode with ENABLE.
SHOW SPANNING-TREE.
As expected, F0/4 is the root port and is
forwarding, and the other interfaces are blocking.
Note that slightly different terminology is
used here, ‘alternate’ instead of non-designated,
but the meaning is the same.
Also, notice that the root ID section shows
SW3’s information, but now the bridge ID
information is different, this is SW1’s
own information.
So, our answers for SW1 were correct.
Next up, let’s go to SW2.
ENABLE.  SHOW SPANNING-TREE.
Looks like we were correct again.
F0/1 and F0/2, connected to SW1, are both
designated and in a forwarding state, although
really these connections are disabled because
SW1 is blocking those ports.
F0/3 is blocking, and G0/1 is the root port.
By the way, something I should have mentioned
before, the COST displayed here is just the
cost of this interface, not the total root
cost, so it only displays 4 here.
If you want to see the total root cost, use
this command I showed you.
SHOW SPANNING-TREE DETAIL.
Here it says, cost of root path is 8, because
there are two gigabit ethernet interfaces
in the path.
Finally, let’s check on SW4.
ENABLE.
SHOW SPANNING-TREE.
So, G0/1 is designated, and G0/2 is the root
port.
So, we successfully calculated the spanning
tree topology.
That’s all for this lab.
Next up, let’s take a look at a lab in Boson
NetSim.
Okay, for today's Boson NetSim for CCNA lab
preview I will once again do something a little
bit different.
Here in the 'network access' section of NetSim
for CCNA, you'll notice there are no labs
for spanning tree.
Why is that, why does Boson not include spanning
tree in NetSim for CCNA?
Well, let's check the exam topics list.
These are the exam topics for the CCNA 200-301,
current version.
2.5, 'describe the need for and basic operations
of rapid PVST+ spanning tree protocol and
identify basic operations.'
So, 'describe' and 'identify'.
There's no mention of 'configure', like these
other topics.
'Configure, configure, configure, configure.'
This one, 'describe' and 'identify'.
So, according to the exam topics list, spanning
tree configuration is not on the CCNA exam.
So that's probably why Boson didn't include
it in NetSim for CCNA.
However I still think it's a good idea to
get some hands-on practice in the CLI, observing
and configuring spanning tree.
So that's why I include labs in my course.
However, if you check out the CCNP ENCOR 350-401
exam topics list, here.
3.1c, configure and verify common spanning
tree protocols.
So configuration is included in the CCNP exam
topics list.
So instead of a CCNA, NetSim for CCNA lab,
let's do a NetSim for CCNP ENCOR lab.
There are quite a few spanning tree labs here.
Starting here, 'Spanning Tree 1', all the
way down to here, 'Implementing Multiple Spanning
Tree Protocol.'
The one we're going to take a look at today
is this one, simply titled 'Spanning Tree
Protocol'.
Click on the lab, and click 'load lab'.
But, I've already done that, so 'lab instructions'.
So there are four switches here, P1ASW1, ASW2,
P1DSW1, DSW2.
ASW mean 'access switch', 'access layer switch'.
And DSW is 'distribution layer switch'.
These are two common layers of network design,
good network designs, and I haven't actually
talked about them yet in my course.
So, you can wait for that in the future.
Just know their meaning now, 'access switch',
'distribution switch'.
Notice the hosts connect to the access switches,
and then the access switches connect to the
distribution switches.
Okay, so just for today's preview I will do
this step here, step 1.
On P1DSW1, issue the SHOW SPANNING-TREE VLAN
1 DETAIL, I just showed you this command,
SHOW SPANNING-TREE DETAIL, to display the
spanning tree for VLAN 1.
Use the output to answer the following questions.
So let's go into the CLI of DSW1 here.
Click on the device and click on 'console'.
Okay, and we're in.
ENABLE.
SHOW SPANNING-TREE VLAN 1 DETAIL.
Okay.
So, question A, which spanning tree is VLAN
1 executing?
We aren't actually going to do any configuration
in this step, by the way, this is just answering
questions.
And actually that's something I really like
about NetSim, they ask you good questions
to really test your understanding of the topic.
So anyway, which spanning tree?
It says it right here, 'VLAN 1 is executing
the ieee compatible Spanning Tree Protocol'.
This means classic spanning tree protocol,
the one I taught you in the lecture video.
This is not rapid spanning tree protocol.
Okay, so that's the answer, regular classic
spanning tree.
B, what are the priority, sys-id, this is
the extended system ID, the VLAN number, and
MAC address.
They are stated here.
Bridge identifier, bridge ID, has priority
24576, sysid 1, which actually gets added
to the priority so it's really 24577 in total.
And this is the MAC address.
So, that's question B. Why is there no root
port?
Well let's confirm, is there a root port?
Here, fastethernet0/1 is designated forwarding,
so it's not a root port, it's a designated
port.
0/2 designated, 0/3 designated, designated,
designated, and designated.
So there are in fact no root ports.
Why is that?
Well, the answer is here.
We are the root of the spanning tree.
This switch is the root bridge.
As you know, every port, every interface on
the root bridge must be designated.
So that's why there are no root ports.
So that's C. And then D, why are there no
blocked ports for VLAN 1?
Well that's the same reason, because it's
the root.
There will be no blocked ports on the root
bridge, they should all be designated ports
in a forwarding state.
Okay, E, what is the timer value for sending
BPDUs, bridge protocol data units?
So, I haven't talked about the timers yet
in the lecture video, so I will talk about
them in the next lecture video, Day 21.
But the answer is here.
Configured hello time.
Hello time is the interval at which it sends
those BPDUs, they're called 'hello BPDUs'.
So 2 means 'every 2 seconds'.
So it will send 1 BPDU every 2 seconds.
What is the maximum age for a BPDU?
Here it is, 20 seconds.
Again, I will talk about this, this maximum
age timer, in the next video.
And what is the value of the forward delay
timer?
It is 15 seconds.
Sorry, there we go.
15 seconds.
These are the defaults.
2, 20, 15.
Okay, so that's the answer for G. Okay, so
there is one more step here to this lab, and
then lab solutions highlighting all of the
different outputs you can see, pretty much
everything we just looked at.
Yeah, okay.
So there it is, Boson NetSim.
If you want to get a copy of Boson NetSim
for CCNA, and I highly recommend you do, look
at all of these guided labs they have here
for all the exam topics.
From network fundamentals, network access,
IP connectivity, IP services, security fundamentals.
So if you can I highly recommend getting a
copy of NetSim for CCNA.
If you want a copy, please follow the link
in the video description.
Thank you for watching.
Please subscribe to the channel, like the
video, leave a comment, and share the video
with anyone else studying for the CCNA.
If you want to leave a tip, check the links
in the description.
I'm also a Brave verified publisher and accept
BAT, or Basic Attention Token, tips via the
Brave browser.
That's all for now.